


Miray Stand-Alone-Tool-Series
P
P
C
C
I
I
S
S
n
n
i
i
f
f
f
f
e
e
r
r
Version 1.5
User’s manual
Copyright © 2006 by miray Software
2
1. Introduction
1.1. Fields of application
PCISniffer is a diagnosis program for the PCI bus. It scans the PCI bus and
detects con-
nected devices. It reads the PCI configuration data of the devices and displays
it in read-
able form. You get detailed information about all PCI devices installed in your
computer.
Even device manufacturer and device names are displayed in plain text. The
PCISniffer
can be used as hardware diagnosis tools and to detect errors or conflicts of
PCI devices,
as well as to inventory the PCI hardware.
1.2. Compatibility
The PCISniffer runs on PCs starting from 386SX-16 with a minimum of 2 MB RAM,
key-
board and a VGA adapter. A 3,5"/1,44 MB floppy disk drive or, alternatively, a
bootable CD
drive is also required. To use the remote data transmission capabilities a
nullmodem cable
and a RS232 port is also required. A PC with PCI bus is optional ;-)
The PCISniffer supports the complete PCI specification, i.e. it detects up to
256 PCI bus-
ses with each 32 devices connected. 64-bit PCI devices are also detected and
displayed.
1.3. Creation of a Bootdisk
If you have received PCISniffer on a bootable floppy disk or a bootable CD,
there is no
further bootdisk creation required. In this case skip this chapter and continue
reading at
“1.4. Start”.
If you have received the compressed software package, extract it into a
directory of your
choice. Proceed with the steps for bootdisk creation as described in the next
paragraph
but one.
If you have a uncompressed software package, you can usually start the creation
proc-
ess directly from the directory the installation package lies in. If this is
not possible, copy
the installation package in a directory of your choice.
3
Now start the installation program included in the software package. Insert a
formatted
3,5"/1,44 MB floppy disk into drive A:. Any data contained on this floppy disk
will be
erased. So please make sure you don’t use a floppy disk with files you will
still need on it.
In the installation program start the creation process. After finishing the
process the floppy
disk you inserted is now bootable and ready.
If you have an ISO-image in your software package, you can create a CD-R with
most of
the available CD-recording applications. After creating the CD-R you have a
bootable CD.
1.4. Start
To start PCISniffer, you must have PCISniffer installed on a bootable floppy
disk or on a
bootable CD. If you haven’t received any of the above, you can create these
from an
installation package, as described in “1.3. Creation of a Bootdisk”.
Insert now the bootable floppy disk or CD in the corresponding drive and make
sure that
the BIOS of your computer boots from the corresponding CD or floppy drive. Turn
on the
computer or restart it. PCISniffer will be started automatically from floppy
disk or CD.
4
2. Interface
After startup PCISniffer first of all searches for installed PCI devices. If
PCISniffer has fin-
ished detecting all the devices, the main screen appears, where the first
detected PCI de-
vice on the first PCI bus in the system is shown.
2.1. Device selection
On the left border of the screen there are three windows vertically aligned.
They contain
the detected PCI busses, devices and functions that are displayed according to
their PCI
address. In the window “Bus” the first detected PCI bus is selected at
program startup. In
this window you can choose the desired PCI bus. The devices connected to this
PCI bus
are listed in the window “device” where the first detected device is also
selected. In the
“device” window you can select the desired device. The available functions
of this device
are listed in the “function” window, where again the first function is
selected.
Using the <Tab> key you can change between the device se-
lection windows in the following order: Bus ¨ Device ¨ Func-
tion ( ¨ Bus
). The current selected window will be highlighted
with a double border.
Using the key combination <Shift>+<Tab> you can change be-
tween the windows in reverse order.
Using the arrow keys you can select the desired bus, device or
function in the currently active window. If another bus is se-
lected, the device list is automatically updated. If anothe
r device
is selected similarly, the function list will be updated automati-
cally and the selection will be set on the first available item in
each case.
Any change in a window of the device selection automatically
updates the PCI data window (see also “2.2. Data Window”).
5
2.2. Data window
The data window is located on the right of the device selection windows. This
window
shows the PCI configuration data of the currently selected PCI function. Please
note that
the value of the window refers to the currently selected function and not on
the device, al-
though some PCI devices offer more PCI function with all the same PCI
configuration data.
The right column of the data window lists address and data spaces for ROM, RAM
or IO-
address-spaces eventually reserved by the PCI function. PCISniffer lists them
only if they
are really valid. This means that the right column can be empty, if a PCI
function does not
reserve any address spaces.
The left column of the data window contains all other PCI configuration data.
These are
valid at any time and therefore are shown at any time.
6
3. Functions
3.1. Quick Help
Using the <F1> key you can get a short overview of the differ-
ent functions and key combinations of PCISniffer to re
member
them if they have been forgotten.
3.2. Storing to Floppy Disk
PCISniffer offers the possibility to store the PCI configuration data to a file
on floppy disk.
Currently, only internal floppy drives are supported. The data is stored on the
floppy in a
file named “PCIxxx.TXT” where the ‘xxx’ represents a three-digit number
that is increased
automatically.
Using the <F> key the PCI configuration data of the cur
rently
selected PCI function can be stored to an internal floppy disk.
Using the key combination <Ctrl>+<F>, a  complete  report
of
all PCI data detected by PCISniffer can be stored to floppy disk.
7
3.2. Remote Transmission
PCISniffer offers the possibility to transmit the PCI configuration data via a
serial null-
modem cable over a RS232-interface to another computer, where it can be
received with a
terminal program and be saved for inventory reasons.
The following connection settings must be set on the opposite terminal:
Speed: 9600 bps / Databits: 8 / Parity: none / Stopbits: 1
With the keys <1> to 4> the PCI configuration data of the cur-
rently selected PCI function can be sent via the correspond
ing
serial interface (COM1 - COM4) to another computer.
Using the key com
binations <Ctrl>+<1> to <Ctrl>+<4> you can
send a complete report of all PCI data detected by PCIS
niffer
via the corresponding serial interface (COM1 -  COM4) to an-
other computer.
When pressing addition
ally the key <Shift> the sending speed
for both single and complete report can be set to 115200 bps.
8
4. Disclaimer
Although PCISniffer was programmed with the largest possible caution and was
tested on
a large scale of different systems, we hope you understand that we cannot give
a warranty
for the proper functionality of the program and that we are not responsible for
damages
resulting of its usage, subject to gross negligence and intention.
5. Feedback
We are deeply interested on your feedback. If you encounter any program errors
or if you
have any improvement ideas, we always try to fix the first named and implement
or inte-
grate the latter. If you only want to tell us your opinions about this
software, we are also
very interested in such information.
internet  http://www.miray.de/
e-mail  feedback@miray.de
 support@miray.de
fax ++49 - 89 - 76 72 91 - 68
postal address miray Software
P.O. Box 15 15 01
80049 München
Germany
