


Miray Stand-Alone-Tool-Series
D
D
i
i
s
s
k
k
S
S
p
p
y
y
Version 2.0
User’s Manual
Copyright © 2003-04 by miray Software
2
CONTENT
1. Introduction 4
1.1. Preface 4
1.2. Fields of Use 4
1.3. Edition Overview 5
1.4. Compatibility 5
1.4.1. Hardware Requirements 5
1.4.2. IDE Controller 6
1.5. Program Start 6
2. Installation 7
2.1. Introduction 7
2.1.1. Bootable Disk 7
2.1.2. Software Package 7
2.1.3. Short Guide 7
2.2. Installation Package 8
2.2.1. Compressed Installation Package (.zip) 8
2.2.2. Self-Extracting Installation Package (.exe) 8
2.2.3. Plain Installation Package 8
2.2.4. Disk-/ISO-Image & other Operating Systems 8
2.3. Installation Program 9
2.3.1. Using the Installation Program 9
2.3.1.1. Main Window 9
2.3.1.2. Security Check 9
2.3.1.3. Error Message 10
2.3.1.4. Finishing the Installation 10
2.3.2. Building from a Floppy Disk Image 10
2.3.3. Building a Bootable CD 11
2.3.4. Building a CD from an ISO-Image 11
3. User Interface 12
3.1. Startup 12
3.2. Address Display 12
3.3. Hex-Display 12
3.4. ASCII-Display 14
3.5. Short-Info 14
3.6. Position-Info 15
3.7. Status-Bar 15
4. Functions 17
4.1. Quick-Help 17
4.2. Navigation 17
3
4.3. Drive Selection 19
4.4. Harddisk Info 19
4.5. Goto 20
4.6. Standard Search (Hex-Search in Pro Edition only) 21
4.7. Not-Search 22
4.8. Edit (Pro Edition only) 23
5. SCSI 25
5.1. Usage 25
5.2. Compatibility 25
5.2.1. Manufacturer Information 25
5.2.2. Driver Information 26
6. Trouble-Shooting 27
6.1. Error #5002 while Loading 27
6.2. DiskSpy Gets Stuck at Startup 27
6.3. Problems with IDE 28
6.3.1. Harddisk not Detected 28
6.3.2. IDE Controller not Found 28
6.3.3. BIOS Adjustments 28
6.3.3.1. Deactivating IO-Caching 29
6.3.3.2. Setting the BIOS to Defaults 29
6.4. Problems with SCSI 29
6.4.1. Restart 30
6.4.2. Deactivating Unused Controllers 30
6.4.3. Deactivating Unused Harddisks 30
6.4.4. Minimal Configuration of the Controller 30
6.4.5. Minimal Configuration of the System 31
7. Miscellaneous 32
7.1. Disclaimer 32
7.2. Feedback 32
4
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1. Preface
DiskSpy does not need an installation in the usual sense. However, these
contain an
installation program to create a bootable floppy disk in the first instance.
Chapter
’
2. Installation shows in a few simple steps how you create a bootable disk by
means
of the installation package that you have downloaded or been sent. Once having
cre-
ated this disk you can start (
’
1.5. Program Start) and use (
’
3. User Inter-
face,
’
4. Functions ) DiskSpy on every PC without any further installation.
This manual explains to you in chapter
’
3. User Interface step by step and detailed
the user interface of DiskSpy and how to operate it. Chapter
’
4. Functions focuses on
the various functions available in the program. Functioning and effects of the
different
modes are described there in detail. For users of the Professional SCSI Edition
there
are some remarks in chapter
’
5. SCSI.
Nevertheless, in case of encountering any problems using the program, you find
useful
information in chapter
’
6. Trouble-Shooting. If this also does not help solving the
problem you are welcome to contact out support (support@miray.de). We also
appre-
ciate obtaining your suggestions of improvement under feedback@miray.de.
1.2. Fields of Use
DiskSpy is a sector-based hard disk drive viewer and editor. You can access and
edit
every single sector of your hard disk, even those sectors which are usually
invisible or
inaccessible in normal operating systems. Furthermore it is possible to search
the en-
tire hard disk drive for values or character sequences. DiskSpy also shows
detailed
information about the capabilities of an installed hard disk drive.
5
1.3. Edition Overview
Edition Differences  PIO
SCSI
Search
Editing  Commercial Use
Free Edition
ü  û
limited
û  û
Professional Edition
ü  û
full
ü  ü
Professional SCSI Edition
ü  ü
full
ü  ü
Depending on the Edition you are using some of the features described in this
manual
may not be available to you. In most cases this will be also specially
indicated in the
concerning chapters.
1.4. Compatibility
DiskSpy runs on 486 or higher PCs with at least 4 MB RAM, keyboard and VGA.
Addi-
tionally an internal 3.5"/1.44 MB floppy disk drive or a bootable CD-ROM drive
is
needed. Furthermore, for a useful deployment the used system should contain a
PCI-
IDE or standard IDE controller and one or more harddisks.
DiskSpy currently supports ATA/IDE harddisks with a capacity of up to 2048 GB
(= 2
Terabytes), i.e. also harddisks above the “magical” limit of 128 GB. The
Professional
SCSI Edition additionally supports SCSI harddisks (
’
5. SCSI).
1.4.1. Hardware Requirements
·  PC 486 or higher, 4 MB RAM, VGA, keyboard
·  bootable internal floppy disk or CD-ROM drive
·  PCI-IDE- or standard IDE controller
optionally:
·  SCSI controller (Professional SCSI Edition only)
6
1.4.2. IDE Controller
DiskSpy supports standard IDE controller (ISA) and PCI-IDE controller. These
can be
internal (onboard) controllers as well as external controllers (PCI or ISA
adapter card).
In case of an ISA/standard IDE controller, the first two channels are searched
for hard-
disks. DiskSpy automatically recognizes all available PCI-IDE controllers and
searches
them for connected harddisks
Remark: If there are one or more PCI-IDE controllers present in the system,
possibly
existing ISA controllers are not taken into account.
Regarding the “PCI-IDE controllers” supported by DiskSpy, this refers to a
standard-
ized programming interface that is supported by the majority of IDE
controllers. But
there are also some, especially along the external PCI controllers, that
incorporate a
different, usually proprietary interface. These mostly also call themselves
“IDE control-
lers”, as they allow IDE harddisks to be connected. Since “IDE” stands
for a program-
ming interface (program1 controller) as well as for a hardware interface
(control-
ler1 harddisk), this double meaning arises. If your PCI controller is complying
the PCI-
IDE standard can be determined, if necessary, by means of the program
PCISniffer,
that can be downloaded for free under www.miray.de/de/download/
sat.pcisniffer.html.
For the PCI controller in question, the field “Classcode” displayed by
PCISniffer has to
show the value “0101xx” (xx = arbitrary).
1.5. Program Start
Insert the bootable floppy disk or CD-ROM into the appropriate drive. Switch on
or re-
start the PC. If necessary, ensure in the BIOS setup that the particular floppy
or CD
drive will be booted. DiskSpy then will be started from floppy disk or CD-ROM
auto-
matically. You will be displayed program screen directly. For further steps in
operating
the program continue in chapter
’
3. User Interface.
7
2. INSTALLATION
2.1. Introduction
2.1.1. Bootable Disk
If you received the program already on a bootable floppy disk or on a bootable
CD,
no further disk creation is needed. In this case, please proceed with step
’
1.5. Program Start.
2.1.2. Software Package
If you received the program as an installation package (= software package),
you will
need a 3.5” floppy disk. Proceed with step
’
2.2. Installation Package in the associated
subsection, depending on whether you received the installation package as
.zip,
.exe or unpacked file.
2.1.3. Short Guide
The following short guide is sufficient in most cases. If you encounter any
problems or
prefer a more detailed installation guide, please continue with reading in the
following
chapters.
Insert a formatted 3.5"/1.44 MB floppy disk into floppy drive A:. Any data on
this floppy
disk will be deleted, so please make sure not to use a floppy disk with data
you might
need later on. Please start the installation program that comes with the
installation
package. Initiate the creation of the floppy disk within the installation
program. After
completion of this process you have a bootable floppy disk. You can boot the
in-
stalled program from this floppy disk on any PC (from 386/486, consult the
hardware
specifications) you want to – see also
’
1.5. Program Start.
8
2.2. Installation Package
2.2.1. Compressed Installation Package (.zip)
If you received the installation package in form of a packed file (.zip), you
have to
unpack it into a directory of your choice. Then you can start the associated
installation
program contained in this package. Proceed in chapter
’
2.3. Installation Program.
2.2.2. Self-Extracting Installation Package (.exe)
If you received a self-extracting installation package (.exe), you only have to
execute
the file. The installation process will be extracted and started automatically.
Please
proceed in chapter
’
2.3. Installation Program.
2.2.3. Plain Installation Package
If you have an installation package that is not compressed, you can usually
start the
installation process directly from the directory the installation files are
located in. If this
does not work, copy all files into a directory of your choice. Execute the
installation
program right from this directory and proceed in chapter
’
2.3. Installation Program.
2.2.4. Disk-/ISO-Image & other Operating Systems
If you have a disk image of the program or if you are unable to use the
installation pro-
gram for Windows, please create the bootable disk as described in
’
2.3.2. Building
from a Floppy Disk Image,
’
2.3.3. Building a Bootable CD or
’
2.3.4. Building a CD
from an ISO-Image.
9
2.3. Installation Program
2.3.1. Using the Installation Program
2.3.1.1. Main Window
When starting the installation program
the main window appears (
’
fig. 1). It
contains 4 elements to control and dis-
play the current installation state:
·  The  progress bar (1) indicates the
current completion state of the boot-
able floppy disk.
·  The status bar (2) displays the cur-
rent installation state and possibly
occurring errors.
·  The start button (3) starts building a
bootable floppy disk.
·  To Exit the installation program press the finishing button (4).
For starting the installation of the program, insert an empty floppy disk into
drive A:.
Then click on “Start Installation”.
2.3.1.2. Security Check
Before starting the installation, a security prompt
(
’
fig. 2) will appear. Please ensure that there is a
floppy disk in drive A: and that it does not contain
any important data you possibly need later on. All
data on the floppy disk will be deleted during the
installation. If you are ready to proceed with the
installation, click “OK”. The installation process will
start immediately. By clicking “Cancel” you return to the main window
without installing.
Fig. 1: main window of the installation program
Fig. 2: security check
10
2.3.1.3. Error Message
In case of getting an error message (
’
fig. 3), one
of the following reasons may be responsible:
·  there is no floppy disk in the disk drive,
·  the floppy disk is write protected or
·  the floppy disk used is defective.
Therefore replace the floppy disk if necessary respectively remove the write
protection
and confirm the error message with  “OK”. Thereafter you will get back to
the main
window again and have to start over with the installation process as described
in
’
2.3.1.1. Main Window.
2.3.1.4. Finishing the Installation
After successfully having built a floppy disk, you
get a notification in form of a dialog window
(
’
fig. 4). Confirm this window with  “OK”. After-
wards click on “Exit” in the main window (
’
fig. 1)
to close the installation program. Continue reading
in chapter
’
1.5. Program Start.
2.3.2. Building from a Floppy Disk Image
You can also use a floppy disk image for simply building a bootable medium.
Since the
installation program of miray Software currently runs on Windows only, this is
espe-
cially recommended if you are using a different operating system. You can use
the
floppy disk image with a disk-imaging program of your choice. It is stored as a
1.44 MB
image for 3.5'' floppy disks (.img).
Under UNIX/Linux it is recommended that you use the available tool dd (syntax:
dd
if=filename.img of=/dev/fd0), just replacing filename.img with the name of the
according
image file.
Remark: Note that a floppy disk image always contains the program itself only.
Even
if you are not using Windows as an operating system, the complete installation
pack-
age often contains other useful files like a manual for example.
Fig. 3: error message
Fig. 4: installation complete
11
After having built a bootable floppy disk you can start DiskSpy on any PC as
described
in chapter
’
1.5. Program Start.
2.3.3. Building a Bootable CD
The image file described in
’
2.2.4. Disk-/ISO-Image & other Operating Systems can
also be used for building bootable CDs. Simply specify this image file as
bootable im-
age in your CD recording program. You will possibly have to select the type
bootable
CD for the recorded CD before. After having built a bootable CD you can start
DiskSpy
on any PC as described in chapter
’
1.5. Program Start.
2.3.4. Building a CD from an ISO-Image
If your installation package contains an ISO image (.iso), you can use it to
create a
CD with most CD recording programs. After having finished the recording you
have a
bootable CD with the corresponding program on it. From this bootable CD you can
start
DiskSpy on any PC as described in chapter
’
1.5. Program Start.
12
3. USER INTERFACE
3.1. Startup
After starting, DiskSpy searches for installed hard disk drives. If only one
hard disk
drive is installed, DiskSpy immediately changes to the main window and displays
the
first sector of this hard disk.
If more hard disks are found by DiskSpy, a selection window will appear, where
you
can select the disk you want to work on. After selection the main window
appears and
the first sector of the selected hard disk will be shown.
The main window shows exactly one sector, i.e. exactly 512 bytes. Since the
scrolling
is not bound to sector boundaries, the end of one sector and the beginning of
the fol-
lowing sector can be shown simultaneously. Nonetheless there are always 512
bytes
shown at a time.
3.2. Address Display
The left row in the main window bears the address display. Prior to the colon
it shows
the number of the sector whose data is displayed in the main window. The sector
num-
ber is counted continuously, starting from 0 (Zero). Sector numbers are shown
in hexa-
decimal notation. After the colon the byte offset within a sector is shown. The
sector
number is only shown at the beginning of a new sector.
3.3. Hex-Display
The middle row of the main window bears the hex display. Here the data
contained on
the hard disk drive is shown in hexadecimal notation.
With the <1> key you change to  8-bit-display-mode
(1-
byte). This is the default display you find when starting
DiskSpy. Every byte is shown separately in hexadecimal no-
tation.
13
tation.
The current display mode is also visible in the status bar (see
also  “2.6. Status Bar”). At startup the 8-bit-display-
mode is
activated.
With the <2> key you can change to the  16-bit-display-
mode (2-
byte). In this display mode 2 bytes are combined to
a word and shown in hexadecimal notation. The display is
also depending on the endia
nness, which can be set with the
<E> key (see below). Please note that in the 16-bit-display-
mode the cursor also moves byte-
wise. So two cursor steps
are needed to change from word to word.
The actual display mode is visible in the block [124]
in the
status bar (see also  “2.6. Status Bar”). At startup the 8-bit-
display-mode is activated.
With the <4> key you can change to the  32-bit-display-
mode (4-
byte). In this display mode four bytes are combined
to a doubleword and are shown in hexadecimal notatio
n. The
dis
play is also depending on the endianness which can be
set with the <E> key (see below). Please note that in the 32-
bit display mode the cursor also moves byte-
wise. So four
cursor steps are needed to change from doubleword to dou-
bleword.
The actual display mode is visible in the block [124]
in the
status bar (see also  “2.6. Status Bar”). At startup the 8-bit-
display-mode is activated.
With the <E> key you can change the  endianness
of the
display. You can change between big-endian (Intel-notat
ion)
and little-
endian. This changes are only effective in the
Hexadecimal display when the display mode is either 16-
bit
or 32-
bit (see above). It always affects the values shown in
the display window described in “2.5. Value Display“.
14
The actual display mode is visible in the block [BL]
in the
status bar (see also “2.6. Status Bar”). At startup the big-
endian-display-mode is activated.
3.4. ASCII-Display
In the right row of the main window the ASCII display can be found. The data of
the
hard disk drive is displayed with ASCII characters.
Using the <B> key you can change the  bit width
of the
ASCII display between 7-bit and 8-bit. In the 7-bit-
mode only
those bytes are displayed with their ASCII value, whose val-
ues are between 32 and 127 (inclusive). Every
other values
are repre
sented by a dot. This eases the reading of character
strings. In the 8-bit-
mode every byte’s value is represented
with the corresponding ASCII character.
The actual display mode is visible in the status bar (see also
“2.6. Status Bar”). The 7-bit display mode is active at pro-
gram startup.
3.5. Short-Info
In the lower left corner of the monitor the short info window with the title
“Selected Disk”
is located. In this window the key data of the selected hard disk drive are
shown. Abun-
dant information can be obtained by pressing the <I> key (see also “3.4. Hard
Disk
Info”).
15
3.6. Position-Info
In the lower right corner a window with the title “Current Position Info”
is located. The
data in this window is related to the current cursor position in the main
window. The
byte on the cursor position is shown binary, hexadecimal and decimal. It is
also com-
bined with the following bytes to a word and a doubleword, according to the
current
endianness settings (see also “2.2. Hex Display”). These word and
doubleword values
are displayed in both hexadecimal and decimal notation. The current cursor
position,
consisting of sector number and offset (see also “2.1. Address Display”) is
shown in
decimal form.
3.7. Status-Bar
The status bar is located at the left bottom line of the screen and shows the
current
status of certain settings. The display is divided into six blocks. Each of
these blocks
shows a certain program status. The yellow emphased character in each of these
blocks shows the currently active setting. The following table lists the
different blocks.
The default setting after program startup is emphased here with the color
orange (light
gray when printed).
qpí
This block refers to the search function (see also
“3.6. Search”). The arrows show whether the search direc-
tion
is forward or backward. The asterisk shows, if there is
already data in the search mask. In this case the search can
be continued by pressing the <C> key. If no data has been
entered into the search mask, a dot appears instead of the
asterisk.
78
This block shows the current bit width
for the ASCII display
(see also  “2.3. ASCII Display”
), accordingly whether the
ASCII display occurs in 7-bit- or 8-bit-display-mode.
16
BL
This block shows the  endianness referring to the hex dis-
play (see also “2.2. Hex Display”
) and the position info (see
also  “2.6. Position Info”
), accordingly whether the display
occurs in big-endian- or little-endian-notation.
124
This block shows the display width referring to the hex dis-
play (see also  “2.2. Hex Display”)
, accordingly whether the
data is shown as 8-bit-values (1), 16-bit-values (2) or 32-bit-
values (4).
RW
This block shows the current working mode of the Disk
Spy
(see also “3.7. Edit”), accordingly whether the read- or write-
mode is activated.
HA
This block only refers to the write-mode. It shows which edit
window
is currently active and where data can be edited,
these being the  hex- or the  ASCII-display
(see also
“3.7. Edit”). If the write-
mode is inactive, the hex display is
always shown as being act
ive, because the current active
display is only relevant in the write-mode.
17
4. FUNCTIONS
4.1. Quick-Help
Using the <F1> key you can get a short overview about the
different functions and key combinations of DiskSpy to re-
member them if they have been forgotten.
4.2. Navigation
The cursor is moved with the arrow keys in the main window. It always moves in
both
the hexadecimal and the ASCII display.
When a vertical motion occurs the cursor jumps to the pre-
ceding or succeeding line whilst retaining its horizo
ntal
position within the line. If the preceding or succeeding line
is not visible, the entire view will scroll by one line up-
or
down
ward. If you try to jump from the first line of the first
sector (number 0) in the pre
ceding line (which does not
exist), the cursor remains in the first line, but changes hori-
zontally to the first position at the line’s beginning. Analo-
gous the cursor changes horizontally to the last position if
you are located in the last line of the last sec
tor of the hard
disk drive and you try to jump beyond to the (also non-
existing) next line.
In a horizontal motion the cursor moves byte-wise to the
left or right. This is also the case when the 16-bit- or 32-bit-
display-
mode is activated, i.e. in this case you have to
press the corre
sponding arrow key twice or four times to
change to the corresponding 16-bit or 32-
bit value. Since
the ASCII display is not affected by the selected bit width in
the hex display, cursor movements occur always in byte
steps. If the cursor is located at the beginning or the end of
a line, it changes to the end or the beginning of the preced-
ing or succeeding line. If the preceding or succeeding line
is not visible, the entire view will scroll by one line up- or
downward.
18
the ASCII dis
play is not affected by the selected bit width in
the hex display, cursor movements occur al
ways in byte
steps. If the cursor is located at the begin
ning or the end of
a line, it changes to the end or the beginning of the preced-
ing or succeeding line. If the preced
ing or succeeding line
is not visible, the entire view will scroll by one line up-
or
downward.
A vertical motion with the Page-Up or Page-
Down keys
scrolls the view in the main window exactly by one sec
tor,
i.e. 32 lines or 512 bytes up- or downward. The cursor re-
tains his position on the screen. If you are located in the
first or last sector and you try to scroll one sector up-
or
downward (to a non-existing sec
tor), the view will scroll to
the begin of the first or the end of the last sector and the
cursor jumps to the first or last byte.
Using the <Shift> keys in combination with the vertical ar-
row keys you can scroll the entire view up- or down
ward by
one line. The cursor retains its position on the screen,
while the content of the main window is scrolled up-
or
downward according to the cursor keys.
Using the <Shift> keys in combination with the horizontal
arrow keys you can scroll the view in the main win
dow to
the left or to the right. The cursor remains at his former
position within the win
dow, only the content of scrolls to the
left or to the right. This horizontal shift has the additional
effect that the line start does not have to be 16-byte-
aligned but can be shifted arbitrarily.
Using the <Home> key you can reposition the cursor at the
upper left corner of the main view. The main win
dow’s view
will not be shifted, only the cursor will be positioned
at the
beginning of the first visible line of the main window.
19
Combining the <Home> key with the <Shift> key you can
repo
sition also the cursor in the upper left corner, but the
main win
dow’s view will also shift so that the sector the
cursor actuall
y is positioned will start in the first line of the
main view. So this displays a sector completely.
4.3. Drive Selection
By pressing the <D> key you can select another hard disk
drive (Drive Select
). If DiskSpy has found more than one
hard disk drive inst
alled, a window similar to the selection
wind
ow at the program start pops up which lists all installed
hard disk drives. You can choose the desired hard disk drive
and change to it by pressing the <Enter> key.
If you change to a hard disk drive you have al
ready selected
before, DiskSpy remembers the cursor position for this hard
disk drive and sets it to exactly the same view as when left.
You can therefore change between hard disk drives and after
changing back you will find yourself on exactly the same po-
sition you were when leaving this drive.
4.4. Harddisk Info
By pressing the <I> key you can activate the
hard disk info
window, which shows much more detailed information about
the selected hard disk drive than the short info (see also
“2.4. Short Info”). T
his information is divided into several
groups. By using the following keys you can display the de-
sired group of information.
20
[General]  General Information  about the harddisk – espe-
cially vendor, serial number, cache size, sector lay
out and
size.
[Version] Version Information
about the ATA/ATAPI version
implemented by the harddisk.
[Modes] Transfer Modes
that are supported by the harddisk,
especially about multiple sector, DMA, UltraDMA and PIO
modes and their respective timings.
[Hardware] Hardware Test Results as far as these are pro-
vided by the harddisk.
[Commands] Supported Command Sets
of the harddisk. As
there are two alternative indication possibilities for some of
the command sets, both alternatives are displayed in two
separate c
olumns. A certain command set is available if it is
displayed as supported in one of the two columns.
This information screen consists of two pages. You can dis-
play the second page by pressing any key.
[Raw]  Raw Data of the harddisk information block,
that is
displayed in clear text in the other information groups.
[eXtended]  Extended Information
about diverse harddisk
fea
tures like streaming, acoustic management and security
abilities.
4.5. Goto
With the <G> key a dialog pops up which offers the possibil-
ity to jump to a desired sector of your hard disk drive (Goto
).
You can choose whether you want to jump to an absolute
position or to a current-sector-
relative position by pressing
the <+> and <-
> key. These keys can be pressed at any time
during the input of the target address. The target address
(absolute or relative) has to be entered in decimal notation.
You can change between insert- and overwrite mode by
pressing the <Ins> key. The resulting target address (abso-
lute) will be shown below the input line in hexadecimal for-
mat.
21
during the
input of the target address. The target address
(absolute or relative) has to be entered in decimal notation.
You can change between insert-
and overwrite mode by
pressing the <Ins> key. The resulting target address (abso-
lute) will be shown below the input line in hexadecimal for-
mat.
4.6. Standard Search (Hex-Search in Pro Edition only)
Pressing the <S> key a search dialog
pops up. You can
enter either an ASCII string or the pattern to search in
hexadecimal form. Up to 512 charac
ters can be entered
into the
search mask. You can start the search process by
pressing the <Enter> key starting at the current cursor po-
sition.
With the <Tab> key you can change between ASCII and
hex in
put line. This can also be done during the input, so
you can mix both ASCII and hexadecimal input.
Pressing the key combinations <Ctrl>+<B> (Backward
) or
<Ctrl>+<F> (Forward) you can change the search direc-
tion. Forward search starts from the current cursor position
up
ward, backward search starts from the same position
downward toward lower addresses.
Pressing the key combination <Ctrl>+<C> within the
search dialog you can load the complete  current sec
tor
into the search mask.
22
With the key combination <Ctrl>+<O> you can re
call the
prior used search pattern (Old) as new search pat
tern in
the search mask.
With the <C> key you can  continue
the search for the
same pat
tern. It is necessary that a previous search has
already been accomplished. This search will then start
from the current cursor position with the same
parameters.
You can see whether a continu
ing search is possible by
checking if the asterisk in the status bar is there (see also
“2.6. Status Bar”).
4.7. Not-Search
With the <N> key you open a  not-search dialog
. There
you can enter a 8, 16 or 32 bit value
in hexadecimal form.
When opening the dialog, the value at the current cursor
position is taken over by default. The not-
search searches
for the first oc
currence of a value different from the one
entered. This helps finding the end of blocks of repeating
values. The not-search can be started by pressing <En-
ter>. It starts directly behind the current cursor position.
By pressing the <Tab> key you can change between the
different input fields.
Pressing the key combinations <Ctrl>+<B> (Backward) or
<Ctrl>+<F> (Forward) you can change the search direc-
tion. Forward search starts from the current cursor position
up
ward, backward search starts from the same position
downward toward lower addresses.
23
With the <A> key you can continue (again) the not-
search
for the same pattern. It is necessary that a previous search
has already been accomplished. This not-
search will then
start from the current cursor position with the same pa-
rameters.
4.8. Edit (Pro Edition only)
With the <W> key you activate the write-mode
. The
cursor in both hex- and ASCII-
view changes its color
to red. When in write mode, the cursor navigation is
restricted to the currently visible data area. If you wish
to change the current visi
ble area, you have to leave
the write-mode first.
You
can determine whether you are in write or not mode by
looking at the block  [RW] in the status bar
(see also
“2.6. Status Bar”).
By pressing the <Tab> key within the write-
mode you
can change between the hex-view and the ASCII-
view. When in hex-view,
you can change the values in
hexadecimal notation. If you are in ASCII-
view, you
can enter the characters directly with your keyboard.
To determine which view is cur
rently active, you have to
see either on the blink
ing cursor or you can see it in the
block [HA] in the status bar (see also “2.6. Status Bar”).
By pressing the <Esc> key you leave the write-mode with-
out saving any changes you made since entering the write-
mode. These changes are displayed in red.
24
When pressing the key combination <Ctr
l>+<S> you
accept the changes you made and save these to the
hard disk drive.
Attention: The so made changes on your hard disk drive
are final and can not be undone. Save changes only if you
know exactly what you are doing!
25
5. SCSI
This chapter exclusively refers to the Professional SCSI Edition as only this
edition
supports SCSI harddisks.
5.1. Usage
You can use DiskSpy with SCSI harddisks in the same way as with IDE harddisks
without any significant differences in the user interface. DiskSpy recognizes
supported
SCSI controllers and connected SCSI harddisks – in addition to IDE harddisks
– auto-
matically at program start. Each SCSI harddisk detected is displayed with a
continuous
controller number, the identifier “SCSI” and its SCSI-ID. Type, vendor and
size of a
harddisk are itemized in the same way as with IDE harddisks.
5.2. Compatibility
DiskSpy generally supports all SCSI harddisk drives. Prerequisite is that this
harddisk
is connected to a SCSI controller that is supported by DiskSpy. Currently
DiskSpy sup-
ports the popular Narrow, Wide, Ultra und Ultra-Wide SCSI controllers of
Adaptec.
Remark: Since DiskSpy contains the original drivers of the hardware
manufacturer,
miray Software does not have any influence on the actual grade of
compatibility. All
statements of miray Software about compatibility have only informational
character,
are based on specifications of the hardware manufacturer and therefore can not
be
legally binding (
’
7.1. Disclaimer). To practically help determining the compatibility,
miray Software offers the program DiskCheck, which can be downloaded for free
at
http://www.miray.de/de/download/sat.diskcheck.html. It is based on the same
SCSI
drivers and displays the SCSI harddisks detected by these.
5.2.1. Manufacturer Information
According to information of the hardware manufacturer, the drivers utilized in
DiskSpy
currently support the following SCSI controllers:
26
·  Adaptec AHA-2930U
·  Adaptec AHA-2940 Ultra
·  Adaptec AHA-2940UW
·  Adaptec AHA-2940AU
·  Adaptec AHA-2944UW
·  Adaptec ASC-19160
·  Adaptec ASC-29160
·  Adaptec ASC-29160LP
·  Adaptec ASC-29160N
·  Adaptec ASC-39160
5.2.2. Driver Information
According to information from the drivers themselves, they also support a
number of
further SCSI controllers, partly designed as onboard chipset (AIC), partly as
adapters
(AHA, ASC). They can be identified clearly by PCI-Vendor-ID and PCI-Device-ID,
listed
in the following table.
Vendor
Model  Device
 Vendor
Model  Device
 Vendor
Model  Device
9004h AHA-2930U 3860h  9004h AIC-7860 7860h  9005h AHA-3940/3950U2x 0050h
" AHA-2930CVAR
3868h  " AIC-7895 7895h  " AHA-3950 U2x 0051h
"  " 3869h  " AIC-7880 8078h  " AIC-7896/7 U2 005Fh
" AHA-4944(U)W 3B78h  " AHA-2940U(W) 8178h  " AIC-789x 006xh
" AIC-755x 5x75h  " AHA-3940U(W)(D) 8278h  "  " 007xh
" AIC-785x 5x78h  " AHA-2944UW 8478h  " AIC-7892(A/B) U160
008xh
" AIC-7560 6075h  " AHA-3944U(WD) 8578h  " AIC-789x 009xh
" AIC-786x 6x78h  " AHA-4944UW 8678h  "  " 00Axh
" AIC-7870 7078h  " AIC-7887 8778h  "  " 00Bxh
" AHA-2940(W) 7178h  " AIC-7888 8878h  " AIC-7899(A) U160 00Cxh
" AHA-3940(W) 7278h  " AHA-4944(U)W EC78h  " AIC-789x 00Dxh
" AHA-2944 7478h  9005h AHA-2940/2950U2W
0010h  "  " 00Exh
" AHA-3944(W) 7578h  " AIC-789x 001xh  "  " 00Fxh
" AHA-4944(U)W 7678h  "  " 002xh  " AHA-2930U2 0180h
" AIC-7877 7778h  "  " 003xh
If necessary, the IDs of your controller can be determined by means of the
program
PCISniffer. Under  www.miray.de/download/sat.pcisniffer.html it is available
for free
download from the miray homepage. For the PCI SCSI controller in question the
fields
“Vendor ID” and “Device ID” in PCISniffer have to match the values
given above for
your SCSI controller.
27
6. TROUBLE-SHOOTING
6.1. Error #5002 while Loading
If Error #5002 appears when starting the program, start it over again. If this
is not suc-
cessful, build the floppy disk again. If the problem is still there, try
another floppy disk or
another floppy disk drive, if available. Users of the Professional Edition or
Profes-
sional SCSI Edition please contact our support (support@miray.de).
6.2. DiskSpy Gets Stuck at Startup
If DiskSpy starts normally but freezes when scanning for harddisks, this is
mostly result
of an incorrect DMA configuration by the BIOS. Try to adjust the DMA and IDE
settings
in the BIOS step by step towards lower values in this case (
’
6.3.3. BIOS Adjust-
ments).
If you use the Professional SCSI Edition and the regarding system is equipped
with a
SCSI controller, this controller can also be the reason. To determine the
source of er-
ror, deactivate all SCSI controllers. In case of the problem does not occur
afterwards it
is probable that a respectively the SCSI controller is the reason. In this case
you find
further hints in chapter
’
6.4. Problems with SCSI.
Remark: The harddisk recognition of DiskSpy at program start can take up to a
min-
ute or longer under certain circumstances. After more than five minutes it can
be as-
sumed that the program has got stuck. The time required for the recognition of
hard-
disks, beside other things, strongly depends on the number of IDE and SCSI
control-
lers installed in the system.
28
6.3. Problems with IDE
6.3.1. Harddisk not Detected
If DiskSpy does not detect a specific harddisk this may have several reasons.
It is pos-
sible that the controller it is connected to has not been detected (
’
6.3.2. IDE Control-
ler not Found). Another common reason for this problem is that the way your
harddisk
is connected does not comply with standard. This may be the case for example if
a
harddisk is configured as slave and the master drive on the same channel is a
CD/DVD
drive or is not present. But under normal circumstances DiskSpy even copes with
that.
6.3.2. IDE Controller not Found
There are two conditions on that IDE controllers are not detected automatically
by
DiskSpy:
·  Standard IDE controllers (ISA) are not taken into account if there are PCI
IDE con-
trollers existing. In this case connect the appropriate harddisks to a PCI IDE
control-
ler or deactivate the PCI IDE controller(s).
·  The used controller does not comply with the PCI IDE standard. Although
most con-
trollers support this standardized programming interface, there are some
controllers
that feature only a proprietary programming interface. You also find
particulars about
this in
’
1.4.2. IDE Controller. Connect the according harddisk drives to another
controller (PCI IDE controller).
6.3.3. BIOS Adjustments
The following hints refer to Adjustments you probably can and should make in
the
BIOS setup of your PC in case of encountering problems when using DMA. However,
since the adjustments provided by your BIOS are vendor and model specific,
these
hints can only be given in a generic form. For a detailed description how to
change a
particular adjustment and which adjustments are possible, consult your BIOS
manual if
necessary. The DMA adjustments are often to be found under “Integrated
Peripherals”
or “Chipset Setup”.
29
Remark: Execute the automatic harddisk detection in the BIOS after each
alteration
of the harddisk and DMA settings to ensure the changes made become effective
for
the according harddisks. Also remember to save the changes made with “Save
and
Exit” when leaving the BIOS setup.
6.3.3.1. Deactivating IO-Caching
If there are problems even in the PIO mode you should deactivate IO caches or
buff-
ers. Especially the option  “Dataport Postwrite” should be set to
“Disable” in case of
problems, if it is available.
6.3.3.2. Setting the BIOS to Defaults
If DiskSpy does not work as desired, despite the hints mentioned above, you can
try to
set the default values by means of the “Load BIOS/Setup Defaults” option.
This ad-
justment tries to avoid all other possible hardware conflicts.
6.4. Problems with SCSI
When using SCSI devices, please pay attention to them being configured and con-
nected to the SCSI controller correctly. In particular SCSI controllers with
SCSI BIOS
must announce a harddisk at system startup to ensure this disk is available to
DiskSpy
subsequently. Furthermore, DiskSpy must support your controller. A list of
supported
SCSI controllers is to be found in chapter
’
5.2. Compatibility.
Remark: Even if a SCSI controller displays the desired harddisks at system
startup,
this is no warranty that these devices are configured and connected correctly.
The
BIOS of the SCSI controller naturally works on a lower level than the SCSI
drivers util-
ized by DiskSpy and therefore possibly recognizes harddisks that are not
detected by
DiskSpy.
DiskSpy has been tested on numerous SCSI controllers. The software as far as
possi-
ble bypasses problems that thereby have been encountered sporadically. For
further
random or sporadic problems the following chapters contain some useful hints
for find-
ing a remedy in most cases. These hints are described in the order they should
be util-
ized in to minimize the necessary efforts as far as possible. The following
problems
30
have been encountered during the tests and could be bypassed by the hints
described
afterwards.
·  DiskSpy gets stuck at startup (during initialization of the SCSI
controllers)
·  No SCSI harddisks are found
·  Not all harddisks are found
6.4.1. Restart
If DiskSpy gets stuck at startup or does not display the desired SCSI
harddisks, try to
restart the computer. Try a simple reset at first (reset switch). Only if this
does not pro-
duce relief you should try to switch off the computer and leave it switched off
for about
30 seconds. Both kinds of restart can counteract signal and state problems of
SCSI
controllers.
6.4.2. Deactivating Unused Controllers
In case a restart does not result in the desired result you should deactivate
unused
SCSI controllers, as far as your system is equipped with more than one SCSI
control-
ler. This may be also advisable if a SCSI controller is generally used but the
harddisks
connected to it will not be used with DiskSpy.
6.4.3. Deactivating Unused Harddisks
In some cases it is possible that SCSI harddisks that are connected to the same
SCSI
controller interfere with each other or the controller itself. For this reason
you should
deactivate several harddisks temporarily or connect them to the controller one
after
another and step by step to determine from which harddisk the interference
probably
originates. Always keep in mind to ensure that the last SCSI device is must
always be
terminated during these attempts.
6.4.4. Minimal Configuration of the Controller
Remedy in case of problems can also be found by configuring the SCSI controller
via
its BIOS setup or, in case of an onboard controller, via the main BIOS setup of
the PC.
31
Try to adjust the lowest and most secure values for the SCSI bus (e.g. Narrow
transfer
mode with a Wide controller).
6.4.5. Minimal Configuration of the System
Try also different ways to connect the SCSI harddisks used in the system,
especially if
using two or more SCSI controllers. As far as possible proceed the following
way: De-
activate all SCSI controllers except one, which should, if possible,
incorporate only one
SCSI channel and be one of the types listed in
’
5.2.1. Manufacturer Information.
Then connect only the harddisk or harddisks required. Apart from defective
harddisks
this proceeding revealed a running configuration in most cases allowing execute
the
projected task.
32
7. MISCELLANEOUS
7.1. Disclaimer
Although DiskSpy was programmed with high diligence and was tested on a large
scale of different systems, we hope you understand that we cannot give any
warranty
for the proper functioning of the program and that we are not liable for
damages result-
ing from its usage, subject to gross negligence and intention.
7.2. Feedback
We are deeply interested in your feedback. If you encounter any program errors
or if
you have any suggestions for improvement, we always try to fix the former and
to im-
plement respectively to integrate the latter. If you simply want to tell us
your opinion
about this software, we are looking forward to it.
Internet http://www.miray.de/
e-mail feedback@miray.de
support@miray.de
Fax ++49 89 767291-68
Postal address miray Software
Postfach 15 15 01
D-80049 München
Germany
